# 8.12 LAB (Grades System) "Add" menu option

CSW8 Learning Goals
In this lab, you will practice

carefully reading the provided function documentation to know what to implement
using your previously-written functions to help implement new functionality
using Boolean value as a flag to know whether to run through the loop again
working with dictionaries stored inside a list (a nested list) - using append()
creating a new dictionary and its elements
formatting the output according to the specifications
writing test cases using assert statements
Table of Contents
Feel free to skip the "Sample Program Flow" section, if you'd rather see them in action in your IDE.

Submission Requirements
Instructions
Adding a new category
Test Your Code (create_category())
Sample Program Flow to Add Categories
Adding a new grade
Test Your Code (is_valid_index())
Sample Program Flow
Troubleshooting

Submission Requirements
You do not need to submit anything on zyBooks.

Continue updating and submitting your files as described in the first checkpoint lab.

Read through the entire lab instructions first, before implementing anything.
In this lab,

update main.py with the functionality described in the Instructions section.
update functions.py
define create_category() and add its helper function is_num() (see the Adding a new category section)
define is_valid_index() and add is_num_str_list() (see the Adding a new grade section)
update tests.py
add the provided (and your own!) assertions for create_category() and its helper function is_num() (see Test Your Code (create_category()) section)
add the provided (and your own!) assertions for is_valid_index() (see Test Your Code (is_valid_index()) section)
add the provided (and your own!) assertions for is_num_str_list() (see Adding a new grade section)

Instructions
This lab builds on the previous checkpoint labs. We assume that you have all_grades main list hard-coded in your program.

In the main program, add the following lines to ask the user whether they want to add a new category or a grade information:

    elif opt == 'A':
        continue_action = 'y' # a Boolean flag for running the loop
        while continue_action == 'y':
            subopt = get_selection(the_menu[opt], submenu)
            if subopt == 'C':
                pass # see the "Adding a new category" section
            elif subopt == 'G':
                pass # see the "Adding a new grade" section
            print("::: Would you like to enter another item?", end=" ")
            continue_action = input("Enter 'y' to continue.\n> ")
            continue_action = continue_action.lower()
Back to top


Adding a new category
In the main program, add the following lines to ask the user for a new category information:

            if subopt == 'C':
                print("::: Enter the category name and percentage (e.g., Quiz 15)")
                ctg_info = input("> ")
                new_ctg = create_category(ctg_info)
                if type(new_ctg) == dict:
                    all_grades.append(new_ctg)
                    print(f"Successfully added |{ctg_info}|")
                else: # returned an error
                    print("WARNING: invalid category information!")
                    print(f"Category information |{ctg_info}| was not added.")
You can skip ahead to the Sample Program Flow to Add Categories section to see the interaction that the above lines of code will enable.

Define create_category() in the functions.py (see the function stub below).
âš ï¸ Implement this function according to the function documentation. Read the documentation carefully first, before implementing anything.
IMPORTANT: error-checking should happen first, before assembling the dictionary - pay close attention to the cases that cause errors.
Since the function relies on the helper function is_num(), copy its implementation from LAB 6.21 to your functions.py
Copy its assert statements to tests.py in case you'll need to change anything in your function code.
Add the tests from the Test Your Code section to your tests.py
âš ï¸ Add (and run!) your own new assert statements for create_category() - pay close attention to the cases described in the function documentation that should cause errors.
Test each case by writing separate assertions.
Back to top


Test Your Code (create_category())
Add the assertions for the is_num() (see Adding a new category above).
Add the assertion tests for create_category() - use the ones below + add your own.
######## ADD CATEGORY OPTION ########
assert is_num("8") == True
assert is_num(8) == False
assert is_num("3.95") == True
assert is_num("8.1.1") == False
assert is_num("8.apple") == False

# Edge cases causing errors
assert create_category("Quiz") == -2
assert create_category("Quiz Quiz Quiz") == -2
assert create_category("Quiz 15 0") == -2

assert create_category("Q 15") == -1
assert create_category("Q,Q 15") == -1

assert create_category("Quiz A") == 0
assert create_category("Quiz 15.A") == 0
assert create_category("Quiz 15.5.5") == 0

# test creation of a category dictionary
arg = "Quiz 25"
result = create_category(arg)
expected_result = { 'category': 'Quiz', 'weight': 25.0, 'grades': [] }
print(f"--> create_category({arg}) returned\n`{result}`\n")
assert result == expected_result

assert create_category("PA 5") == { 'category': 'PA', 'weight': 5.0, 'grades': [] }
Back to top


Sample Program Flow to Add Categories
When the user selects the option "Add", the program determines whether they want to add the category or grade information and then proceeds to collect the necessary information.

Below is the result of the user selecting A from the main menu and then selecting C to add grade categories:

...
You selected option A to > Add.
What would you like to add?
C - Categories
G - Grades
::: Enter your selection
> c
You selected C to add categories.
::: Enter the category name and percentage (e.g., Quiz 15)
> test 15
Successfully added |test 15|
::: Would you like to enter another item? Enter 'y' to continue.
> n
::: Press Enter to continue
When entering an invalid category information:

...
You selected C to add categories.
::: Enter the category name and percentage (e.g., Quiz 15)
> quiz
WARNING: invalid category information!
Category information |quiz| was not added.
::: Would you like to enter another item? Enter 'y' to continue.
...
Back to top


Adding a new grade
In order to add a grade (or multiple grades), we need to know to which category they will belong.

ðŸŽŠ Good news - you should have already implemented most of this functionality in previous weeks! :-)

Remember the print_grade_info() function?

It displayed an ordinal position of the category, when we were printing the categories for Option L (List) (see when the user "selected C to list categories" in LAB 8.11).

Now, you will use print_grade_info() to help the user select the category to which to add grades (see the main program interaction shown below).

You will also use another function from a previous lab to collect the grade(s):

Add is_num_str_list() from LAB 7.14 to your functions.py file.
Copy its assert statements to tests.py in case you'll need to change anything in your function code.
In the main program, add the following lines to ask the user for a new grade information and to output appropriate errors:

            elif subopt == 'G':
                print("To which category would you like to add new grades?")
                print_grade_info(all_grades, show_grades = False)
                print("::: Enter the number corresponding to the category.")
                user_option = input("> ")
                if is_valid_index(user_option, all_grades, 1):
                    ctg_idx = int(user_option) - 1
                    category = all_grades[ctg_idx]["category"]

                    print(f"Adding grades to {category}")
                    print(f"{all_grades[ctg_idx]}")
                    print("::: Enter the numeric grades separated by spaces")
                    grade_info = input("> ")
                    grade_list = grade_info.split()

                    if is_num_str_list(grade_list):

                        all_grades[ctg_idx]["grades"] += grade_list
                        print(f"Success!")
                        print(f"{all_grades[ctg_idx]}")
                    else:  # is_num_str_list() returned False
                        print("WARNING: invalid grade information!")
                        print(f"The grade data |{grade_info}| was not added.")
                else: # is_valid_index() returned False
                    print(f"WARNING: |{user_option}| is an invalid category number!")
You can skip ahead to the Sample Program Flow to Add Categories section to see the interaction that the above lines of code will enable.

Define is_valid_index() in the functions.py (see the function stub below).
âš ï¸ Implement this function according to the function documentation provided below. Read the documentation carefully first, before implementing anything.
IMPORTANT: error-checking/condition-checking should happen first, before proceeding to index the list - pay close attention to the cases that cause errors (add to the provided assert statements).
Once you implement and test this function you are done with this option!

Enjoy playing around with the program to see it in action!

Back to top


Test Your Code
Add the assertions for the is_num_str_list() (see Adding a new grade above).
Add the assertion tests for is_valid_index() - use the ones below + add your own.
######## ADD - GRADES OPTION ########
assert is_valid_index('0', ["Quizzes", 25.5]) == True
assert is_valid_index('1', ["Quizzes", 25.5]) == True
assert is_valid_index('2', ["Quizzes", 25.5]) == False
assert is_valid_index('2', ["Quizzes", 25.5], 1) == True # overwriting the default
Back to top


Sample Program Flow to Add Grades
Similarly to the previous section, the user first selects the option A from the main menu.

When selecting G to add grades:

You selected G to add grades.
To which category would you like to add new grades?
1 - PA (5%)
2 - CA (15%)
3 - LA (25.0%)
4 - Quiz (25%)
5 - Project (25%)
---
::: Enter the number corresponding to the category.
> 4
Adding grades to Quiz
{'category': 'Quiz', 'weight': 25, 'grades': []}
::: Enter the numeric grades separated by spaces
> 100 100 100
Success!
{'category': 'Quiz', 'weight': 25, 'grades': [100.0, 100.0, 100.0]}
::: Would you like to enter another item? Enter 'y' to continue.
Hint: Notice the contents of the 'grades' list and their types. (See the Hint below if you don't know what needs to be changed.)

If the user entered an invalid option, e.g., when selecting a category, they should see:

::: Enter the number corresponding to the category.
> 0
WARNING: |0| is an invalid category number!
::: Would you like to enter another item? Enter 'y' to continue.
Similarly, when entering grades in an invalid format:

::: Enter the numeric grades separated by spaces
> A A- B
WARNING: invalid grade information!
The grade data |A A- B| was not added.
...
::: Enter the numeric grades separated by spaces
> -1
WARNING: invalid grade information!
The grade data |-1| was not added.
Back to top


Hints
When adding the grades all_grades[ctg_idx]["grades"] += grade_list, did you ensure that your grade_list contains the correct types? Did you re-compute the total grade after you added the new scores?
Troubleshooting
Check the Troubleshooting guide and post on the forum if your issue is not addressed there.

NameError: name 'is_num' is not defined - see the second bullet point in Adding a new category
assert create_category("Quiz 25") == { 'category': 'Quiz', 'weight': 25.0, 'grades': [] } causes an AssertionError
Structure your assert using the template shown in Figure 5.12.1
Did you remember to convert the weight into a float?
Did you remember to set the 'grades' key to an empty list [ ]?