# 8.13 LAB (Grades System) "Update" menu option

CSW8 Learning Goals
In this lab, you will practice

carefully reading the provided function documentation to know what to implement
using your previously-written functions to help implement new functionality
using Boolean value as a flag to know whether to run through the loop again
working with dictionaries stored inside a list (a nested list) - using indexing to update specific values
creating a new dictionary and its elements and indexing it to retrieve its values
formatting the output according to the specifications
writing test cases using assert statements
Table of Contents
Feel free to skip the "Sample Program Flow" sections, if you'd rather see them in action in your IDE.

Submission Requirements
Instructions
Updating a category
Test Your Code
Sample Program Flow
Troubleshooting

Submission Requirements
You do not need to submit anything on zyBooks.

Continue updating and submitting your files as described in the first checkpoint lab.

Read through the entire lab instructions first, before implementing anything.
In this lab,

update main.py with the functionality described in the Instructions section.
update functions.py
define update_category() - its helper functions should already be added (see the Updating a category section)
update tests.py
add the provided (and your own!) assertions for update_category()
continue writing assertions to test it and its helper functions (see Test Your Code section)

Instructions
This lab builds on the previous checkpoint labs.

Carefully compare your main program code for "Add" (LAB 8.12) and "Update" - notice the similarities.

open the two labs side-by-side to be able to compare the respective main program code parts
copy over and test the components of your main program that this lab requires
take a closer look at the "Add a new grade" (LAB 8.12), which needed to first select a category and then collect its information
In this lab, we will only work on updating the category information leaving grades untouched.

In the main program, add the following lines to ask the user which category they want to update and to provide the update information:

    elif opt == 'U':
        continue_action = 'y'
        while continue_action == 'y':
            print("Which category would you like to update?")
            print_grade_info(...)
            print("::: Enter the number corresponding to the category.")
            user_option = input("> ")
            if ...: # check that the user_option is a valid index
                ctg_idx = int(user_option) - 1

                # Save the current category name and weight
                category = all_grades[...]["category"]
                weight = all_grades[...]["weight"]

                print(f"Updating category {category} ({weight}%)")
                print("::: Enter the new category name and percentage (e.g., Quiz 15)")
                ctg_info = input("> ")
                result = update_category(...)
                if type(result) == dict:
                    print("Success!")
                    print(f"Updated {category} ({weight}%)",
                          f"to {all_grades[...]['category']} ({all_grades[...]['weight']}%)")
                else: # update_category() returned an error
                    print("WARNING: invalid category information!")
                    print(f"Category information |{ctg_info}| was not added.")
            else: # is_valid_index() returned False
                print(f"WARNING: |{user_option}| is an invalid category number!")

            print("::: Would you like to update another category?", end=" ")
            continue_action = input("Enter 'y' to continue.\n> ")
            continue_action = continue_action.lower()      
Replace the ellipsis (...) with the appropriate variables - consult the Sample Program Flow to Update Categories section to see the interaction that the above lines of code should enable. Use the the code from "Add a new grade" in LAB 8.12 to help you here.

Back to top


Updating a category
Define update_category() in the functions.py (see the function stub below).

âš ï¸ Implement this function according to the function documentation. Read the documentation carefully first, before implementing anything.
ðŸŽŠ Good news - you should have already implemented most of this functionality in the previous labs! :-)
Add the tests from the Test Your Code section to your tests.py

âš ï¸ Add (and run!) your own new assert statements - pay close attention to the cases described in the function documentation that should cause errors.
Test each case by writing separate assertions.
Back to top


Test Your Code
Add the assertion tests - use the ones below + add your own.
######## UPDATE CATEGORY OPTION ########

# Edge cases causing errors (same as for create_category())
assert update_category(all_grades, 3, "Quiz") == -2
assert update_category(all_grades, 3, "Quiz Quiz Quiz") == -2
assert update_category(all_grades, 3, "Quiz 15 0") == -2

assert update_category(all_grades, 3, "Q 15") == -1
assert update_category(all_grades, 3, "Q,Q 15") == -1

assert update_category(all_grades, 3, "Quiz A") == 0
assert update_category(all_grades, 3, "Quiz 15.A") == 0
assert update_category(all_grades, 3, "Quiz 15.5.5") == 0

# change the Quiz
assert update_category(all_grades, 3, "zzz 0") == { 'category': 'zzz', 'weight': 0.0, 'grades': [] }
assert all_grades[3] == { 'category': 'zzz', 'weight': 0.0, 'grades': [] }
# undo the previous call by restoring the Quiz back
assert update_category(all_grades, 3, "Quiz 25") == { 'category': 'Quiz', 'weight': 25.0, 'grades': [] }
assert all_grades[3] == { 'category': 'Quiz', 'weight': 25.0, 'grades': [] }

# Verify that grades are untouched
la_20_dict = { 'category': 'LA', 'weight': 20.0, 'grades': [100.0, 100.0, 100.0, 5.0, 0.0, 70.0] }
assert update_category(all_grades, 2, "LA 20") == la_20_dict
assert all_grades[2] == la_20_dict
Back to top


Sample Program Flow to Update Categories
Below is the result of the user selecting U from the main menu:

...
You selected option U to > Update.
Which category would you like to update?
1 - PA (5%)
2 - CA (15%)
3 - LA (25.0%)
4 - Quiz (25%)
5 - Project (25%)
---
::: Enter the number corresponding to the category.
> 4
Updating category Quiz (25%)
::: Enter the new category name and percentage (e.g., Quiz 15)
> zzz 55
Success!
Updated Quiz (25%) to zzz (55.0%)
::: Would you like to update another category? Enter 'y' to continue.
> 
::: Press Enter to continue
We can verify that this update did indeed occur by listing the categories (notice the zzz we added above instead of the Quiz):

You selected option L to > List.
What would you like to list?
C - Categories
G - Grades
::: Enter your selection
> c
You selected C to list categories.
1 - PA (5%)
2 - CA (15%)
3 - LA (25.0%)
4 - zzz (55.0%)
5 - Project (25%)
---
::: Press Enter to continue
When entering an invalid category information:

...
You selected option U to > Update.
Which category would you like to update?
1 - PA (5%)
2 - CA (15%)
3 - LA (25.0%)
4 - Quiz (25%)
5 - Project (25%)
---
::: Enter the number corresponding to the category.
> 0
WARNING: |0| is an invalid category number!
...
Updating category PA (5%)
::: Enter the new category name and percentage (e.g., Quiz 15)
> Participation
WARNING: invalid category information!
Category information |Participation| was not added.
...
Updating category PA (5%)
::: Enter the new category name and percentage (e.g., Quiz 15)
> PA -1
WARNING: invalid category information!
Category information |PA -1| was not added.
...