# 8.14 LAB (Grades System) "Delete" menu option
Instructor note:
The assert statement below was updated.

delete_item([1, 2, 3], '2') should return 3, and not 2.

the function is intended to delete the item at provided index position of the list, and return the item deleted.

the provided index is 2. a start_idx is not provided, so the default is 0. 2 - 0 is still 2.

the item at index 2 is 3. so the function should return 3.


CSW8 Learning Goals
In this lab, you will practice

carefully reading the provided function documentation to know what to implement
using your previously-written functions to help implement new functionality
using Boolean value as a flag to know whether to run through the loop again
working with dictionaries stored inside a list (a nested list) - using indexing to retrieve specific values
removing items from a list
formatting the output according to the specifications
writing test cases using assert statements
Table of Contents
Feel free to skip the "Sample Program Flow" sections, if you'd rather see them in action in your IDE.

Submission Requirements
Instructions
Deleting a category
Test Your Code
Sample Program Flow
Troubleshooting

Submission Requirements
You do not need to submit anything on zyBooks.

Continue updating and submitting your files as described in the first checkpoint lab.

Read through the entire lab instructions first, before implementing anything.
In this lab,

update main.py with the functionality described in the Instructions section.
update functions.py
define delete_item() - its helper functions should already be added (see the Deleting a category section)
update tests.py
add the provided (and your own!) assertions for delete_item()
continue writing assertions to test it and its helper functions (see Test Your Code section)

Instructions
This lab builds on the previous checkpoint labs.

In the main program, add the following lines to ask the user which category they want to delete:

    elif opt == 'D':
        continue_action = 'y'
        while continue_action == 'y':
            print("Which category would you like to delete?")
            print_grade_info(all_grades, show_grades = False)
            print("::: Enter the number corresponding to the category.")
            user_option = input("> ")
            result = delete_item(all_grades, user_option, 1)
            if type(result) == dict:
                print("Success!")
                # Get the deleted category name and weight
                category = result["category"]
                weight = result["weight"]
                print(f"Deleted {category} ({weight}%)")
            elif result == 0: # delete_item() returned an error
                print("WARNING: there is nothing to delete.")
            elif result == -1: # is_valid_index() returned False
                print(f"WARNING: |{user_option}| is an invalid category number!")

            print("::: Would you like to delete another category?", end=" ")
            continue_action = input("Enter 'y' to continue.\n> ")
            continue_action = continue_action.lower()    
Back to top


Deleting a category
Define delete_item() in the functions.py (see the function stub below).

âš ï¸ Implement this function according to the function documentation. Read the documentation carefully first, before implementing anything.
ðŸŽŠ Good news - you should have already implemented most of this functionality in the previous labs! :-)
Add the tests from the Test Your Code section to your tests.py

âš ï¸ Add (and run!) your own new assert statements - pay close attention to the cases described in the function documentation that should cause errors.
Test each case by writing separate assertions.
Back to top


Test Your Code
Add the assertion tests - use the ones below + add your own.
######## DELETE OPTION ########

assert delete_item([], 1, 1) == 0
assert delete_item([1], '-2') == -1
assert delete_item([1, 2, 3], '2') == 3
Back to top


Sample Program Flow
Below is the result of the user selecting D from the main menu:

...
You selected option D to > Delete.
Which category would you like to delete?
1 - PA (5%)
2 - CA (15%)
3 - LA (25.0%)
4 - Quiz (25%)
5 - Project (25%)
---
::: Enter the number corresponding to the category.
> 5
Success!
Deleted Project (25%)
::: Would you like to delete another category? Enter 'y' to continue.
>
::: Press Enter to continue
We can verify that this deletion did indeed occur by listing the categories and noticing that the deleted category is no longer on the list.

When entering an invalid category information:

...
You selected option D to > Delete.
Which category would you like to delete?
1 - PA (5%)
2 - CA (15%)
3 - LA (25.0%)
4 - Quiz (25%)
---
::: Enter the number corresponding to the category.
> 0
WARNING: |0| is an invalid category number!